---
title: "AI POLICY: AI Public Policy Proposal Competition"
date: 2024-05-04
type: essays
academic: false
published: true
pdf: /docs/2023-24-ai-public-policy-proposal-rhea-madhogarhia.pdf
source: /Users/rheamadhogarhia/Desktop/Year 4/UNZIPPED/GoogleTakeout/Takeout/Drive/UCHICAGO GDRIVE/Second Year/Y2Q3/AI PUBLIC POLICY PROPOSAL RHEA MADHOGARHIA.docx
tags: [ai/ai-policy, writing/opinion]
genre: Essay
---
Rhea Madhogarhia

AI Public Policy Proposal Competition

Due May 4th, 5pm CST

Amidst Slovakia’s 2023 parliamentary election, a synthetic audio interview of the leader of the Progressive Slovaki party discussing how to rig the election in an interview spread across Facebook. The recording, posted only a few days before the polls opened, bypassed Meta’s manipulated media policy due to its audio format and was difficult to debunk due to Slovakia’s election moratorium making media outlets and politicians unable to respond or debunk the fake recording in a timely manner. While quantifying how much this doctored recording swayed the Progressive Slovaki party’s loss in the election is difficult, the interviewer whose voice was simulated in the recording reported that her colleagues had believed the interview was real, prompting them to share the Facebook post with others. Despite the recordings' poor editing and reportedly absurd content, in this digital age, we must recognize that a considerable part of the population turns to social media to get their news - according to Pew, 30 percent of adults regularly get their news from Facebook - and, without news outlets able to comment or verify the recording, it's not too far fetched to assume that some previously undecided voters were swayed. This example is just one example of the type of threat synthetic content has on governmental elections. Although this proposal focuses on the threat that synthetic content, like doctored/spliced audio, deep fakes, and AI generated text, has on governmental elections, these threats of defamation, libel, and misrepresentation are salient for both public figures’ (like Taylor Swift) and individuals’ reputations. 

The harmful political and psychological effects of this technology may naively warrant a ban on deep fake creation applications. But, banning the use of deepfakes in political content is simply too controversial (would garner immense backlash from builders, engineers, and tech-optimists), restrictive (devalues the more creative and useful uses of synthetic art etc) , and doesn’t consider the fact that any bad faith actors or individuals finding workarounds will have an equal effect on an election. Synthetic content will inevitably exist in the media we consume, so how do we protect our elections and selves from being harmed by it? Synthetic content disclosure and investment into the development of image and content modification tracking are promising, yet still not all-encompassing, solutions to this issue. 

You would think synthetic content regulation amidst campaigns in elections should be straightforward: campaigns should be prohibited from using and disseminating deepfake and doctored audio-visual content in campaign material and messaging. Additionally, if AI-generated text is used in campaign messaging, disclosure statements must be attached to the artificially generated text in accordance with the proposed AI Disclosure Act of 2023. Let’s say campaigns popularly reject this idea and believe that AI-generated content is a necessary tool. In this case, we introduce a robust disclosure policy and possibly continue to prohibit the use of audio-visual synthetic content: all artificially generated images and text must be marked as artificially generated and deep fake messaging is prohibited in official campaign materials. At the company level, for companies like OpenAI or Midjourney, incentivization to incorporate disclosure into their existing and new technologies can be impactful, making this less of a campaign integrity issue and more of a responsible-tech development issue. If all audio-visual content from, for example, OpenAI is watermarked or inextricably linked to a disclosure statement, then election campaigns know they can use these resources and the companies benefit from the politically important use of their technology. Taking this idea a step further, we can create benefits for AI-tech companies, like being marked as a “Safe AI or NSCAI-Approved” company, that make disclosure a key issue. This type of licensing, provided by the NSCAI, would be similar to the “FDA-Approved” status that influences consumer use every day. Therefore, there is built-in distrust of content created by non-licensed individuals or companies. 

The question of how we initially get these companies to buy into this idea of licensing arises. The alternative to licensing is to get caught disseminating unmarked synthetic content in electoral campaigns and, subsequently, be potentially punished (fines, for example). It seems likely that individuals would be incentivized to obtain licensing from our knowledge of confessional behavior in the criminal justice system. One study, “Confessions and Denials When Guilty and Innocent: Forensic Patients' Self-Reported Behavior During Police Interviews”, showed that a majority of guilty individuals at some point confessed when interviewed and 41% of these individuals hoped for “mitigation of sentence”. This displays that, in the face of significant punishment, people will tend towards honesty. There are major differences between tech companies and interrogated guilty individuals, but with the existence of deep fake pornography, it is not extremely far-fetched to believe that certain use of this technology will be criminalized in the US (in fact, it already has been in the UK. 

Although less policy oriented, elections would benefit from governmental interest in the research and development of AI content modification tracking and detection. The current state of this technology is no match for how rapidly AI technology is advancing. Right now, detection tools for AI-generated text are inaccurate. One study showed that AI detection tools are not very good at distinguishing human written text from AI generated text, for both GPT 3.5 and GPT 4. A 2023 review on deepfake detection technologies acknowledges that these technologies still struggle to be effective in varied lighting scenarios and that major challenges still exist in authenticating “spoofed” audio. An underlooked area of interest in advancing AI detection is modification tracking leveraging blockchain technology. A major fear in elections is that deepfakes will take existing audio-visual content and modify the content to misrepresent the candidate or message pictured. Examining blockchain for cryptocurrency, we see that an extensive and robust public record of transactions exists for every created coin. Essentially, given a coin, you can trace every transaction the coin has been through back to its creation. If companies like Apple, Google, Canon, and Sony invested in a way to leverage this technology, create tokens or unique IDs for created images, videos, and audio, then modification detection would be much easier - search this history to see if the content has been altered over time. Furthermore, correction of misrepresentation would be possible by tracing the content back to its original form. If this technology were to be implemented we can also potentially trace who the modifications were made by and cross-check, and subsequently appropriately punish or reward, if they have the aforementioned licensing to be creating synthetic content.

The final prong to this proposal is federally funded AI literacy programs. While detecting synthetic content and licensing is important for the deterrence of malicious content creation in elections, people must also know what something being AI generated/synthetically generated means. According to a study conducted by the Ipsos Consumer Tracker, Americans are weary of the misuse of AI but tend to trust AI more than they do humans. Even if individuals know the content is artificially generated, this may not change the impact the content has on their judgment. Therefore, AI literacy content should be provided in the aforementioned disclosures that come in any AI generated election materials. Increasingly, this content should be taught in schools, a curriculum adjustment that can be supported by the Department of Education (a safeguard of students’ first amendment rights) and mandated at the state level.

Overall, synthetic content disclosure and modification tracking incentivized and supported by artificial content creator licensing has the potential to protect US governmental elections by mitigating the defamatory and malicious potential of AI generated content. Enhanced by AI literacy programming, these policies will help to ensure politicians and political campaigns are fairly represented and received by the public. Ultimately and ideally, our governmental elections should be driven by every voter’s judgment of the platforms, integrity, and character of the politicians running rather than a negatively curated, misconstrued, and false representation of them. 

Works Cited

“Blockchain Can Help Combat Threat of Deepfakes. Here’s How.” World Economic Forum, www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/10/how-blockchain-can-help-combat-threat-of-deepfakes/. Accessed 4 May 2024. 

Elkhatat, A.M., Elsaid, K. &amp; Almeer, S. Evaluating the efficacy of AI content detection tools in differentiating between human and AI-generated text. Int J Educ Integr 19, 17 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40979-023-00140-5

Gupta, Gourav, et al. “A Comprehensive Review of Deepfake Detection Using Advanced Machine Learning and Fusion Methods.” MDPI, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, 25 Dec. 2023, www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/13/1/95. 

Meaker, Morgan. “Slovakia’s Election Deepfakes Show AI Is a Danger to Democracy.” Wired, Conde Nast, 3 Oct. 2023, www.wired.com/story/slovakias-election-deepfakes-show-ai-is-a-danger-to-democracy/. 

People Are Worried about the Misuse of AI, but They Trust It ..., www.ipsos.com/en-us/people-are-worried-about-misuse-ai-they-trust-it-more-humans. Accessed 4 May 2024. 

“Social Media and News Fact Sheet.” Pew Research Center, Pew Research Center, 15 Nov. 2023, www.pewresearch.org/journalism/fact-sheet/social-media-and-news-fact-sheet/. 

“UK Criminalises Creation of ‘Deepfake’ Images without Consent.” The Economic Times, economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/world-news/uk-criminalises-creation-of-deepfake-images-without-consent/articleshow/109351618.cms?from=mdr. Accessed 4 May 2024. 

Volbert, Renate, et al. “Confessions and Denials When Guilty and Innocent: Forensic Patients’ Self-Reported Behavior during Police Interviews.” Frontiers in Psychiatry, U.S. National Library of Medicine, 29 Mar. 2019, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6449450/#:~:text=Participants%20reported%20more%20confessions%20when,than%20when%20guilty%20(35%25). 

Weiner, Daniel, and Lawrence Norden. “Regulating AI Deepfakes and Synthetic Media in the Political Arena.” Brennan Center for Justice, 12 Dec. 2023, www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-reports/regulating-ai-deepfakes-and-synthetic-media-political-arena?ref=upward.news. 

Zucker, Ondřej Kundra (Tr. Alex. “How to Deepfake an Election.” The Dial, The Dial, 23 Nov. 2023, www.thedial.world/issue-10/slovakia-election-deepfake-russia-artificial-intelligence.